Okay so we're gonna start off with one of the simple cases here we're going to look at the electrical
potential energy.
However I am going to limit my discussion here to point charges.
OK.
So what are we knowable point charges we know that we've already seen that there is a force acting on
between them and the forces given by cool Ohm's Law and I can write it as this K Q1 Q2 and over the
distance squared just right as R squared.
So let me go out somewhere in space and imagine here this is just empty space and I place one positive
charge here and I stick it there I glue it so it can't move so it is actually fixed in space.
All right.
Now what do I do.
I'm gonna go really really far away and I'm gonna go and find a another charge and for this case let's
just consider a another positive charge.
So here I am out in space I'm gonna grab that positive charge.
All right.
Now what happens when I bring it closer.
Well when it's in this position right here guess what there is a little bit of a force acting on this
charge.
There's also a little force acting on this one but I have something that is keeping it fixed.
So what happens now.
Well I'm going to apply a force right here.
This is my applied force FAA and what I want to do now is I want to bring this charge and I want to
place it right over here.
But what happens as I start bringing it closer.
Right as I start bringing it closer it's harder for me to do that right.
Because imagine when I'm kind of getting close to my final position all right.
This here is the final position let me write that down so this is final position
so if you think about it now if you draw what the force is well since it's much closer together the
force is going to be bigger and again the force I can calculate from cool Ohm's Law.
So I'm got make this vector down over here bigger.
All right.
Well I had to apply a force in order to bring that one there it's not going to get there by itself.
Right.
So my applied force for only to hold it here has to be at least as big as cool Ohm's Law.
So I had to do some positive work in order to bring this charge all the way to this final position.
So let me call this final spacing here.
Let's call it a distance.
Ah so we'd be able to use this equation to calculate the force.
First of all during this path remember that F.A. my applied force does positive work
the work done by the electric field in this case would be negative because the force the electric force
is like this and my displacement is like this.
So the angle is 180 degrees in that case which gives me negative work.
Now I can't use my equation unfortunately in order to calculate the work done by the electric force
that I did previously.
You can't just use f DOT and the displacement.
And the reason you can't this the reason you can't use this is because the force is not constant so
it doesn't apply for this particular case but I'll show you how to do it in this case.
But just remember this you've got to be a little bit careful.
I can still kind of use the argument to decide whether or not the work is positive or negative I just
I'm unable to use this equation to calculate the work.
All right regardless this charge eventually made it to this position.
So there is a force acting on it and there was some work done by this applied force.
Whenever you do some work you're going to end up storing some potential energy in the system.
OK.
So the electrical potential energy this is a definition now you write it all down.
Now it's energy which is going to be measured in jewels.
All right.
So that's gonna be my unit at the end of the equation again.
I'm gonna write it as you and I'm going to put a subscript e to remind me that it is electrical.
All right.
The formula looks pretty similar to cool Ohm's Law.
So we have the same constant k.
I still have the charges Q1 and Q2 except now it gets divided only by the distance.
Ah so this is the equation pretty straightforward now there are some differences.
Energy is a scalar quantity.
OK so it's just a number.
This here was a vector quantity so which had a magnitude and a direction associated with it.
Now one kind of comment about this one I was calculating forces using my cool Ohm's law up here.
I really didn't care whether was positive or negative.
OK.
Because positive and negative when I put the charges in here they only tell me something about the direction
of the force for potential energy.
It's going to be very very important to actually put the signs of the charges in here.
So in this case if this is positive and this is positive and they're separated by some distance I am
going to get a positive potential energy in the system.
There are cases however where you could have negative potential energy in the system.
All right so we really it's important to use sine of charges in this equation at the end of the day.
The only thing that's really going to matter is how the potential energy changes.
So one thing to notice just like the force when the distance is very very far we're going to get a small
number for the force and we're going to get a small amount of potential energy however one one charge
is positive and one is negative.
What we're going to have over here when I multiply both of these I will have a negative number for potential
energy and that's OK.
There's nothing wrong with that.
We'll see cases where we'll see what that means in a minute.
OK.